# evolutionary cellular reversal
This project aims to generate (evolutionarily) a Turing machine or a cellular automaton that can reverse strings. This is a very hard problem, in fact. In my current approach, I use 2+1-dimensional spacetime, as it is probably easier to make work there, it has better connectivity than 1+1-dimensional. I hope to generate an evolution-like model where cellular automata capable of moving and replacing letters will finally evolve and learn how to reverse strings. It is very tricky to define proper loss functions, proper selection mechanisms, proper creatures crossing rules, so that this system will evolve and that far, in a limited computational resources framework.
But to this moment, I was able to make some progress! Firstly, length-3 strings on 5x5 field are (almost) successfully being reversed that way (5x5-len3/example.png: sample spacetime evolution under two creatures' rules on two inputs). Secondly, it manages to copy and transcript (!) (letters A to B, B to A, consistently) length-8 strings on a large (21x19x55) field (transcription-demo: demonstrations, diagrams are contracted in the time dimension here). I try to mimic real microbiological mechanisms here, for example, I add start-stop codons there, they will probably help to erect string-processing constructions; I also regulate matter density (as it should not be too high, as in real life, I think) using corresponding loss, etc. But I was not able to make them rotate strings yet (I have 10 loss functions now, and it seems unstable, but they can't find how to rotate, in any configuration...)
